---
id: 206
title: Progress, sort of
date: 2011-03-07T14:43:03+00:00
author: Jeremy
excerpt: Yes, yes, things are coming along.
layout: post
guid: http://jdkolassa.net/?p=206
permalink: /2011/03/206/
ljID:
  - "988"
dsq_thread_id:
  - "1111122195"
categories:
  - Writing
tags:
  - death
  - music
  - progress
  - writing
---
There is some good news available, if anyone is actually interested in my writing progress. I decided not to junk everything and start over, so much work was saved. I did, however, write out a scene and then realize that it made no sense. So I had to alter that, but the joy of writing something new, going off in an entirely different (well, not _entirely_, I suppose, as they both lead to largely the same conclusion) direction, was quite palpable.

Of course, that might just have been the Alter Bridge, Sick Puppies, and Pseudo Rebels music I was listening to. Yes, I listen to crazy, eclectic things. Specifically, I was listening to Alter Bridge&#8217;s &#8220;Isolation,&#8221; Sick Puppies&#8217; &#8220;Maybe,&#8221; and the only Pseudo Rebel&#8217;s song I&#8217;ve ever heard up, &#8220;Shut up and Party.&#8221; The first two are the kind of rock music that I really enjoy&#8211;along with Idiot Pilot&#8217;s &#8220;Retina and the Sky&#8221;&#8211;with this powerful, deep beats and an uplifting feeling at their core. The kind of music that would belong in a major motion picture (Idiot Pilot&#8217;s was going to be in the first _Transformers_, but was cut and only appears on the soundtrack CD.) That&#8217;d be the kind of rock music I would put front and center in the soundtrack to my movie (or heck, my _life_). It&#8217;s good music for spurring the fingers to write.

What isn&#8217;t good is nearly dying twice; a slip in the tub and the near collision with a hatchback (while I&#8217;m on foot, natch) almost spelled the end of my career. Alas, I didn&#8217;t get much writing done over the weekend.

But nobody&#8217;s looking now&#8230;

<!-- NgfbSharing::get_buttons content filter skipped: content ignored in back-end -->