---
id: 323
title: Peeves
date: 2011-05-01T12:09:19+00:00
author: Jeremy
layout: post
guid: http://jdkolassa.net/?p=323
permalink: /2011/05/peeves/
ljID:
  - "1026"
categories:
  - Writing
tags:
  - peeves
---
[Canada Votes: More of the Same or Breaking the Mould? | Britannica Blog](http://www.britannica.com/blogs/2011/04/canada-votes-more-same-breaking-mould/).

There are few things more annoying to me than having to get up in the morning, but one of them is when someone writes a sentence&#8230;and just doesn&#8217;t follow through with it. Example:

> <span style="border-collapse: collapse; font-family: Verdana, Geneva, Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif; line-height: 21px;">Harper, whose Conservative Party came to power in 2006, when the party won 124 seats to the Liberals 103 and was asked to form a government.</span>

Harper&#8230;what? What did Harper do? Who is Harper? What is Harper? Good god, its as if the sentence has ADHD. Of course, if you wanted to write it correctly:

> Harper&#8217;s Conservative Party came to power in 2006, when the party won 124 seats to the Liberals 103 and was asked to form a government and annoy everyone by endlessly proroguing parliament.

Well, of course, you may leave the latter part off if you prefer.

Oh, and this example:

> <span style="border-collapse: collapse; font-family: Verdana, Geneva, Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif; line-height: 21px;">Will the NDP so split the opposition vote that the Conservatives will romp home to a majority, or will it break the mould of Canadian politics and perhaps usher in an era of coalition government, between the Liberals and NDP.</span>

Ahem, methinks you didn&#8217;t end that on the right note.

A last entry in the writing world are sentences that begin with a parenthesis&#8230;and never have a closing one. Good lord does that grind my gourd. I don&#8217;t know why, it really shouldn&#8217;t, but there is something so misshapen, so incomplete, so _aborted_ as a hanging parenthesis. It should be a crime. (And for my libertarian friends who say &#8220;who&#8217;s the victim?&#8221; I&#8217;d say, &#8220;My eyes.&#8221;)

<!-- NgfbSharing::get_buttons content filter skipped: content ignored in back-end -->