---
id: 416
title: Where I Was On 9/11
date: 2011-09-11T11:48:43+00:00
author: Jeremy
layout: post
guid: http://jdkolassa.net/?p=416
permalink: /2011/09/where-i-was-on-911/
ljID:
  - "1074"
dsq_thread_id:
  - "1450907088"
categories:
  - Philosophy
  - Politics
tags:
  - September 11
---
It seems apropos to this day to write a blog post saying where one was when the towers fell.

I was in 7th grade gym class when I first heard, though I wasn&#8217;t really sure what was going on. I think I was playing dodgeball, and I idly remember seeing one of my gym teachers out the corner of my right eye saying something about planes hitting a tower. They did not speak to us at that time, doubtlessly because they had no idea what was going on themselves.

It wasn&#8217;t until the last period, which I think was a study hall, when our principal came over the loudspeaker and announced what had happened. I remember our study hall monitor, an old bald guy with thick square glasses, afterwards try to explain to us the magnitude of the situation. I think he drew a picture on the chalkboard of the Twin Towers. Nothing they said actually sank into me.

I mean, terrorists hijacking planes and running them into towers and killing hundreds of people? My young mind&#8211;I think I was 11 or 12&#8211;just couldn&#8217;t comprehend it.

When I went home, Mom had the TV on, and there for all to see were the burning wreckage of the towers. We talked about it, though I could not tell you anything that we actually said. Only an intense feeling of confusion and loss.

I think it was that night, or a few nights later, my father was taking me somewhere in his truck, a beat up, rusting GMC Sonoma from the early nineties, in a fairly subdued hunter green. He had put on the news on the radio, and I listened to a reporter inform us about some sort of CIA raid going on in a city called Cobble. (All I could think of was: Who the heck would name a city &#8220;Cobble?&#8221; Obviously, that was not the case.) There were reports of hits and stings across Europe, and maybe even Asia. There was a sense that we were fighting back and taking names.

Most likely, these were all exaggerations. They did a lot of that, at the time.

As you can see, I do not have much of a story to tell. I was nowhere near the towers. I was only in New York State, not New York City. I did not lose any friends on 9/11. My story of that day is very undramatic.

For me, the thing that sticks out most starkly is how my life has since been divided into two.

The first half of my life consisted of blissful childhood, where I was basically unaware of anything. But looking back, I can see dramatic differences between then and now. Sure, parents were worried about their children in the nineties, but they were not excessively paranoid. There were no boogeyman coming around the corner ready to snatch up youngsters or blow up your car. Security was fairly light, though present. We didn&#8217;t worry about the state; it was still somewhat distant, only coming home every April. Sure, life wasn&#8217;t paradise, but we weren&#8217;t scared out of our wits all the time.

After 9/11, that was completely and&#8211;perhaps irrevocably&#8211;changed. Suddenly the terrorists weren&#8217;t just in Afghanistan and Iraq, they were hiding in the local Price Chopper, at the graveyard, in the bushes, even in your own toilet! We needed to have police out everywhere, in force, in uniforms, in choppers, with big guns. The government had to watch everything, lest those nasty dirty terrorists sneak in and harm somebody. Children had to be kept at home. Our handbags had to be checked&#8211;you know, just to be sure.

That&#8217;s what I remember most about 9/11 and its aftermath: the paranoia. It was never the same after that. My mother began to be scared for me, quite a lot, and while she was no happy-go-lucky do-what-thou-will parent before then, she practically became a prison warden afterwards. Personally, I never understood _her_ own descent into that madness; we lived out in the countryside, and while our neighbors weren&#8217;t miles away (I could walk to their house if I wanted) we were still surrounded on two sides by woods. We were nowhere _near_ a terrorist target, or anyone else who would harm us, for that matter. (Once, when I was child, several years before 9/11, I remember the cops came by looking for a fugitive. Once. And I think it turned out he was actually on the other side of the state.)

Part of me wishes I was born in the late seventies rather than the late eighties, so I would have properly experienced the nineties. Looking back in history, 1990-2001 seems to almost be a golden age, comparatively. It was a great time to be an American, to explore a new world that was opening up, to live free. It is truly a shame that on September 11, 2001, the door to that new world snapped shut, potentially forever.

<!-- NgfbSharing::get_buttons content filter skipped: content ignored in back-end -->