---
id: 7
title: 'A Matter of Faith…and Reason: Part 1'
date: 2011-01-22T12:13:30+00:00
author: Jeremy
layout: post
guid: http://localhost/wordpress/?p=7
permalink: '/2011/01/a-matter-of-faith%e2%80%a6and-reason-part-1/'
ljID:
  - ""
dsq_thread_id:
  - "1111121803"
categories:
  - Religion
tags:
  - atheism
  - ignosticism
  - Methodism
  - self-discovery
  - spiritual humanism
---
In life, it is always important to reevaluate and question one&#8217;s beliefs. Without questioning, one does not change, and how awful would life be if one always stayed the same, stuck in stasis, never evolving? Why, if that happened on a more macro scale, we would still be speaking in grunts!

The other day, my colleagues questioned me on why I held certain political and spiritual beliefs. They aren&#8217;t unreasonable questions, although generally I prefer to hash out discussions such as these over blogs and the written word, as I&#8217;m not very good as an orator. So, in order to help new readers learn more about me and what they can expect, I&#8217;m going to embark on a brief journey on why I hold the theological tenets I do today, so you can learn a bit more about me and so we&#8217;re all on the same page.

I mean blog post.

<!--more-->

## A Journey Up the Mountain

When I was a wee little lad, I grew up in a house in the middle of the countryside&#8211;well, not the middle exactly, we did have a forest behind us&#8211;in the upstate region of New York. While most people think of New York as being a very Communist, Marxist, Socialist city with a rich island to it&#8217;s east and a much smaller island to its west that was a province of Nu Joizee&#8211;a country no one wants to visit&#8211;with everything north of the outpost of Yonkers being Canada. That is, in fact, not the case; northern New York is both quite rural and quite conservative. I characterize it as the &#8220;South of the North,&#8221; in that it is heavily dependent on farmers for its (admittedly weak) economy, has relatively conservative social views, and has a dominant Christian sentiment; in fact, it&#8217;s so darn religious that back in the 1800&#8217;s it was known as the <a href="http://www.crookedlakereview.com/books/saints_sinners/martin1.html" target="_blank">&#8220;Burned Over District,&#8221;</a> since there was so much evangelism there was no &#8220;fuel&#8221; left to &#8220;burn.&#8221; That sentiment lived on despite, well, everything. However, in upstate&#8217;s defense, it also lacked certain traits of the South, including but not limited to, hatred of minorities, a fervent desire to &#8220;get rid&#8221; of gays, and trying to outlaw abortion. Upstate is a bit libertarian in that respect; the people there, while having the view that such things may be bad, don&#8217;t really try to impose their viewpoints on others, and just want to be left alone. (I think their view is: well, I&#8217;m not the one burning in hell, so what do I care?)

Into this environment I was born on the threshold of the 90s. I was brought up as a member of the <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_Methodist_Church" target="_blank">United Methodist Church</a>, a relatively mild form of Protestant Christianity, and my parents were constantly telling me about the wonders of the world, always through the lens of God. &#8220;You see how the wind moves the grass?&#8221; my mother said at one point. &#8220;That&#8217;s the hand of God.&#8221; Or light coming down through the clouds, that was somehow generated by a 365-watt bulb in heaven. My father actually went a step farther, being a Methodist minister, and he was also quite a conservationist, and he would tell me that mathematics as well as physics were inventions of God.

But it never quite stuck with me. I blame it on church services. You see, we would drive for about half an hour north of where we lived to go to a small town where our United Methodist chapter was located. It didn&#8217;t really make much sense to me at the time, since there was already one that we could practically walk to, but I figure it&#8217;s because the pastor at the time was a good family friend. Indeed, he&#8217;s a pretty chill dude, but that was the other part: the eight-year old me could not&#8211;and probably would not&#8211;understand why we had to sit for an hour and a half listening to him prattle on about how we always had to keep the Lord Jesus in our hearts (I remember at one point I thought that would surely be grounds for a triple-bypass surgery) and why we were so dependent on Christ&#8217;s offer of salvation. I was a kid, there was no way I was going to really absorb any of that, and I wanted to run around and play in nature, walk into the forest, go up hills, roll in the grass (to my mother&#8217;s horror), swim in the streams, and maybe even climb a tree if I could. I could not figure out why, if &#8220;God&#8221; really existed, &#8220;He&#8221; would want us to stay indoors for an hour listening to someone talk, instead of actually _being_ out _there_, you know, _doing_ things. It all seemed a waste of time for me. But, I went&#8211;if only because at the end of each service, they had donuts in the reception hall. And believe me, those were _good_ f%&^*$@ donuts.

So I guess, for most of my childhood, I was an &#8220;[agnostic Methodist](http://atheism.about.com/od/aboutagnosticism/a/theism.htm),&#8221; in that I went to church, I &#8220;believed&#8221; in God and Methodist doctrine, but I was always had my doubts. I never quite got it.

When I got older, going into my preteen years, I started to doubt more. First off, how could one even live constantly thinking about &#8220;What Would Jesus Do?&#8221; It would drive anyone insane. Second, how could one have free will, when one of the two choices presented led to eternal damnation? It was a false choice. Third, I was growing more rebellious towards my parents, who were inserting themselves into my life, were constantly putting limits and restraints on what I could do, and generally did not accept my thoughts on anything. They were tyrants (which got worse as I moved into full adolescence) and I generally connected their dominance with the dominance of God over the people, especially whenever our dear pastor talked about us being &#8220;servants of God&#8221; or &#8220;subjects within His Heavenly Kingdom.&#8221; That also threw me a curve ball: wait, we&#8217;re living in a representative democracy. Didn&#8217;t we have a freaking _American Revolution_ because we thought monarchy was bad?

I also had a copy of Encarta Encyclopedia, and when Wikipedia was introduced, I flocked to that site regularly, despite only having a 56k dialup connection (don&#8217;t remind me.) I learned about new forms of theology, of beliefs, of ideas. Such things were not genuinely accepted in the household; while both my parents encouraged me to learn, and were really impressed that I could read the newspaper at a very young age (I think I was 6 when I started reading the editorial on how, yes Virginia, our city really _should_ buy a snowplow when three feet fall in a day), they didn&#8217;t really tolerate, at least initially, anything that went against their beliefs. They essentially paid lip service to free thinking and open-mindedness, and I knew. I hid my knowledge away from them, which wasn&#8217;t hard, since Mom never really got how to use a computer, they never got onto mine, and I did most of my research up in my room. It was there, in that hideaway that smelled of teenage body odor (which I always thought smelled like pizza) that I learned about atheism, and, lo and behold, there were more like me! There was the Atheism section on About.com, where I delved even deeper into the contradictions and idiocies of Christianity, such as: why did people require a &#8220;Sky Daddy&#8221; to keep them good and moral, why could they not just be good and moral because it was right? And furthermore, why did those followers keep going back to God like an abused wife, when he clearly not treating them properly and was making them entirely dependent upon him? Where was human action?

It eventually came to a head one day when my father was trying to force me to go to church with him. I had had enough of it; not even the donuts could lure me back to sitting in those uncomfortable wooden pews for an hour and listening to wasteful drivel. It was not efficient, it was not a good use of my time. (And why was my mother staying home that day, I wondered.) After he tried to force me, I finally yelled at him &#8220;I&#8217;m an atheist!&#8221;

Cue Armageddon.

In truth, though, I was not an atheist at that point, it was simply the only term I had found that fit. I think, looking back, that at the time I was really a deist. I still sort of believed in god, but I just didn&#8217;t believe that god was in any way personal to us, and did not interfere in human affairs, allowing us to do what we willed. I attribute this belief to listening to my uncle Jim, who at one family gathering stated his belief, in that, &#8220;God isn&#8217;t here. He created us, created the world, as a beautiful, exquisite flower, a wondrous creation, and then left. He went out there, to work on other things, to create more beauty, but he isn&#8217;t here now.&#8221; (At least, that&#8217;s what I remember.) And so, for a time, I was truly a deist, a belief that was sort of reinforced in high school when one of my close friends also admitted his own difficulties with Christianity (while another admitted he was a flat-out Buddhist), and while researching this together, we both agreed we were deists, believing science as the &#8220;gospel&#8221; of the one true god.

But this, with time, slowly morphed into real atheism. While science was all well and good, why did god need to exist to in this paradigm? The concept seemed rather useless and unnecessary. Moreover, as Creationism and (un)Intelligent Design were exposed for the bunk that they are, I began to question my belief that a deity created the universe. Eventually I became a true atheist, and learned the distinction between &#8220;strong&#8221; or &#8220;positive&#8221; atheism and &#8220;weak&#8221; or &#8220;negative&#8221; atheism; I placed myself in the latter camp, not ready to say unilaterally that there _wasn&#8217;t_ a deity. I learned much about this from the atheist communities on Livejournal, where I started my serious blogging, and slowly met others of this new atheist society, from all over the world, discussing and trading thoughts and discovering what was and wasn&#8217;t atheism.

Up until now, my journey on the theological road stemmed from rebellion against my parents. Although I refused to be labeled as a &#8220;rebel atheist,&#8221; one of those teenagers who was merely an atheist because his/her parents weren&#8217;t, I suppose a great deal of it came from that. But engaging the atheist community, I began to change.

## Down the Other Side

I suppose it came about because I started to hang out on a community labeled &#8220;antitheism,&#8221; it&#8217;s tagline being: &#8220;Hate the religion, love the religious.&#8221; For a time, I just enjoyed hanging out with people who were good at writing, had a generally positive attitude, and who all agreed that religion was a problem.

But this &#8220;problem&#8221; began to take on darker tones. Some members of the community felt that religious people should be &#8220;culled&#8221; from the herd of humanity. Many wanted to take steps to outlaw or restrict religions, which I found intolerable (other than the belief that churches should pay taxes, which I generally accepted.)

I also disagreed with some of the implications that a few drew from being atheist. Some felt that being an atheist excluded any and all forms of spirituality whatsoever, which I generally did not agree with; I felt there was some truth in the warm fuzzy feelings one got from engaging with people, and that reaching a new state of awareness through meditation (and, if so be it, mind altering drugs) was not crazy talk. Other people felt that being an atheist meant that you should definitely fall on the left-wing of the political spectrum, something I _vigorously_ disagreed with (and still do.) I also saw through some of the veils of atheism, and realized that it had its own problems. One of the largest, I felt, was that division between &#8220;positive&#8221; and &#8220;negative&#8221; atheism. The whole divide hinges on a turn of phrase:

  * Positive Atheism: &#8220;God _does not_ exist.&#8221;
  * Negative Atheism: &#8220;I _do not believe_ in God.&#8221;

Looking at it now, I scratch my head and wonder how I bought into that. For when it comes to belief, does not saying &#8220;I don&#8217;t believe in X&#8221; mean exactly the same thing as &#8220;X doesn&#8217;t exist?&#8221; For if you do not believe in something in the field of theology, then to you, it doesn&#8217;t exist, right? They&#8217;re the same statement coming at the same issue from two different angles, but fundamentally they&#8217;re the same thing. Of course, some atheists then add &#8220;Well, negative atheism _really_ means &#8216;I don&#8217;t believe in God, but he might exist,'&#8221; as if that&#8217;s some sort of justification. In that case, aren&#8217;t you just an agnostic who doesn&#8217;t know? (At this point, they then chime in, &#8220;Yeah, we&#8217;re agnostic atheists&#8230;&#8221;)

But I also found that the atheist vs. theist debate was itself completely and utterly pointless. The arguments seemed to stretch on forever, but no matter how they went, there was never any concrete effect on our daily lives (unlike with politics.) The world kept turning, the sun kept rising, and no deity ever showed up to say &#8220;Well, actually&#8230;&#8221; There was never any evidence either way, with everything being &#8220;proven&#8221; or &#8220;disproven&#8221; with abstract thoughts and hazy arguments. In essence, &#8220;god-language&#8221; was muddled, empty, and entirely dependent on emotions.

It was then I slipped from being an atheist to being what I am now: an ignostic.

## In the Hidden Valley

Wikipedia defines an [ignostic](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ignosticism) as one who argues that a consistent definition of what &#8220;god&#8221; is must be put forth before any sort of discussion can commence; while this is a reasonable proposition, and I agree with it to some extent, I&#8217;m more of the latter definition: I declare that the question &#8220;Does God exist?&#8221; to be utterly irrelevant and meaningless.

Words have meaning, so we&#8217;re told. But what is the meaning of concepts such as &#8220;God,&#8221; &#8220;Providence,&#8221; &#8220;First Mover,&#8221; etc.? When we delve into these topics, we almost immediately descend into a thick sludge not unlike the lower levels of Jupiter&#8217;s atmosphere, where we&#8217;re trapped by language that could be defined as &#8220;unthinkable.&#8221; How the hell are we supposed to wrap our minds around the concept of a being that created the universe, is omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent,  omnibenevolent (even though he&#8217;s a right jerk), and oh, he actually takes interests in individual beings whose individual existence is but an incalculably tiny portion of the whole sum of existence (in fact, one could easily say that one human&#8217;s existence is, in the grander scheme of things, negligible)?

And without any evidence to put forth as for god&#8217;s existence, well, what kind of argument can we have? Honestly, none. We can only state our beliefs. The only area where one could, hypothetically, have &#8220;evidence&#8221; is in the Creationism/Intelligent Design debate, which I consider separately from the question on god&#8217;s existence, but let&#8217;s be honest there: evolution has won that argument hands down.

But I also disagree with atheists, who, through arguing so stridently against the existence of a god, put so much importance and meaning into god-language. For me, there&#8217;s nothing to believe or disbelieve in when it comes to god; it&#8217;s like saying that I don&#8217;t believe in colorless green ideas that sleep furiously; well, it&#8217;s a nonsensical statement, there&#8217;s nothing to believe. Some then argue such a stance is positive atheism, but I don&#8217;t go there. At this point, I&#8217;ll admit such a decision is based less in logic than it is in self-interest; I just don&#8217;t want to be associated with those who call for the restrictions and outlawry of religion. That&#8217;s some bad juju over there.

## I like the Ranch. And the dressing, too.

So this is where I am now. I&#8217;m an ignostic, a theological noncognitivist: I don&#8217;t see any meaning in debating god&#8217;s existence, and thus I refrain from taking part or from saying I&#8217;m on either side. There&#8217;s nothing there to argue about.

I&#8217;m also not one to go around criticizing religions unnecessarily. Sure, I&#8217;ll rail against the Catholic Church because it is a supremely backward institution, a throwback to days of barbarism, and I&#8217;ll fight against any attempts to establish a theocracy in the United States of America, but otherwise, I leave people alone. Only when they attempt to shove their ideas down my throat do I pull out my old canards, if only to make them back off and maybe, just maybe, reconsider their ways. But people must come to the truth organically, of their own &#8220;free will.&#8221; Proselytizing, other than having a civil, reasoned discourse on the topic, will not turn anyone towards truth. Trust me, I have experience on that one from both sides.

I also have some element of spirituality, which could be summed up as &#8220;[Spiritual Humanism](http://spiritualhumanist.info/).&#8221; The name gets a bad rap, because of one &#8220;church&#8221; that sells &#8220;minister licenses&#8221; in order to make money; while I agree with some of the tenets listed on their site, I&#8217;m not linking to them, nor do I really &#8220;follow&#8221; that &#8220;church.&#8221; Instead, the link above is closer to what I feel spirituality is, and avoids all that PR-damaging nonsense (even though my writer must point out it&#8217;s misspelling of &#8220;Spiritual&#8221; as &#8220;Spiritial&#8221; in the page title; why oh _why_ must people do this?) For me, spirituality is not flinging fireballs through the air or calling upon some greater power to strike down that guy who just cut you off going down Massachusetts Avenue; it&#8217;s about connecting with people, sharing the wonder and joys of our natural universe, and celebrating the passage of time. There&#8217;s also, of course, ample meditation, as well as rituals, though I doubt most people would consider &#8220;happy hour&#8221; to be a ritual. But think about it: you&#8217;re going with people to collectively imbibe a mind-altering substance, partake in a socializing experience that is meant to develop social bonds, and become closer as friends. It almost sounds like communion when you put it that way, although I certainly hope nobody is eating the flesh of a two-thousand year old zombie.

It should also be noted that spiritual humanism is very, very individualist; everyone has their own views of what exactly it is. This ties into ignosticism in a way, since there is no coherent definition, but I&#8217;m okay with that. I think spirituality is bottom up, and highly individualized, as opposed to religion, which is top-down and collectivized (though everyone has their own little tweaks, they don&#8217;t go against doctrine.)

And that is where I currently stand. Next time, I&#8217;ll explore how I became a libertarian, and where I am in that muddled mess that is modern libertarianism.

<!-- NgfbSharing::get_buttons content filter skipped: content ignored in back-end -->