---
id: 1089
title: 'Does &#8220;very conservative&#8221; equal &#8220;libertarian-leaning&#8221;?'
date: 2013-03-14T15:18:08+00:00
author: Jeremy
layout: post
guid: http://jdkolassa.net/?p=1089
permalink: /2013/03/does-very-conservative-equal-libertarian-leaning/
ljID:
  - ""
dsq_thread_id:
  - "1137460599"
categories:
  - Philosophy
  - Politics
tags:
  - libertarianism
---
CPAC starts today, and continues throughout the weekend, being the nation&#8217;s largest gathering of conservatives in the country. I myself am not going, even though I live in DC, because I find it to be a colossal joke. Inviting Allen West, Mitt Romney, Donald Trump, and [the homophobic bigot known as Cliff Kincaid](http://jdkolassa.net/?p=1085), as well as turning away gay conservatives who are probably the future of the conservative movement, strikes me as so dumb that it&#8217;s a joke without a punchline.

Reading about it in the news, though, something has come up that makes me scratch my head. Aaron Blake and Sean Sullivan of _The Washington Post_ have an article called &#8220;[5 Things to Watch at CPAC](http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/the-fix/wp/2013/03/14/5-things-to-watch-at-cpac/?Post+generic=%3Ftid%3Dsm_twitter_washingtonpost).&#8221; One thing they wrote made me scratch my head (underlined emphasis here mine):

> **2. New GOP vs. old GOP**: As [the debate over Rand Paul’s filibuster](http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-politics/wp/2013/03/08/mccain-calls-paul-cruz-amash-wacko-birds/) showed, the Republican Party is very much wedged between the older generation of foreign policy hawks and establishment-minded politicians and the new generation of <span style="text-decoration: underline;">very conservative, often libertarian-leaning Republicans</span>

Er, that&#8217;s not quite right.

I know there are a lot of libertarians out there who think we should continue to pursue the idea of &#8220;fusionism,&#8221; of aligning with conservatives, because of our shared free market values. I count many of them as my friends But I&#8217;m not one of them. In fact, I see fusionism as a dangerous, self-destructive concept that could badly, perhaps even fatally, wound the liberty movement and American libertarianism. There are serious differences between conservatism and libertarianism that I think makes fusionism a bad fit, and we should be doing more these days to split the two and establish a stronger, more independent, brand identity for libertarianism.

Perhaps the most stark and visible difference are social issues. Conservatives usually are against homosexuality, are against abortion, are for &#8220;traditional&#8221; social mores, want to keep people locked into gender roles, and generally believe that the good of a larger culture trumps the good of the individual, and where individual and culture conflict, the individual should shut up and accept his or her place. Are you a woman but don&#8217;t like to wear dresses and prefer riding motorcycles and fixing cars? Traditionally, conservatives would say &#8220;Too bad, now get back in the kitchen.&#8221; Traditionally, libertarians would tell you, &#8220;Do as you will, so long as you bring no harm to another.&#8221;

Those are very different approaches.

I think the implications of being a libertarian, the very way one thinks that leads one to libertarianism, rules out several conservative ideas. [It first rules out the likes of Cliff Kincaid and his vile attacks on homosexuality](http://jdkolassa.net/?p=1085). I think it also rules out a lot of the &#8220;VDARE&#8221; type racism you get on the fringe right, and the Islamophobia you also see with people like Pamela Geller. It should rule out a lot of the gender stereotypes that many on the right seem to want to perpetuate by government power, at least on the farther right. It also says no to cronyism, protectionist trade policies (which were championed by Rick Santorum in the last GOP presidential primary), bailouts, the national security state, massive spending on the military, etc.

Although there is a sort of &#8220;thin&#8221; libertarianism where you can technically be a &#8220;libertarian&#8221; but still have some hateful ideologies on the side (thinking of Lew Rockwell and some of the Mises Institute ilk), I for one fully agree with Matt Zwolinski of _Bleeding Heart Libertarians_ [when he writes](http://bleedingheartlibertarians.com/2011/12/libertarianism-thick-and-thin/):

> I am reminded of Gordon’s review by some of the reactions to our <a title="Ron Paul continued" href="http://bleedingheartlibertarians.com/2011/12/ron-paul-continued/" target="_blank">recent</a> <a title="How Did We Get Here?  Or, Why Do 20 Year Old Newsletters Matter So Damn Much?" href="http://bleedingheartlibertarians.com/2011/12/how-did-we-get-here-or-why-do-20-year-old-newsletters-matter-so-damn-much/" target="_blank">discussion</a> of the Ron Paul newsletters. One reaction in particular (see <a href="http://bleedingheartlibertarians.com/2011/12/how-did-we-get-here-or-why-do-20-year-old-newsletters-matter-so-damn-much/#comment-394121067" target="_blank">here</a> for an example), was that even if the racist rhetoric of the newsletters could be attributed to Rothbard, Rockwell, or Paul himself, this does nothing to undermine the libertarian credentials of these individuals for the simple reason that there is no inconsistency between racism and libertarianism. If being a libertarian just means being committed to the non-aggression principle, then one’s beliefs about the intelligence, criminality, or even basic moral status of members of other races simply isn’t an issue. So long as one is committed to opposing the initiation of force against all persons, one has met the one and only necessary and sufficient condition for membership in Club Libertarian.
> 
> Personally, I think the Rothbardian emphasis on the non-aggression principle as definitive of libertarianism is unwarranted. And his argument for it certainly [leaves much to be desired](http://bleedingheartlibertarians.com/2011/05/how-not-to-argue-for-libertarianism/ "How Not to Argue for Libertarianism"). But I do think there’s _something_ to be said for understanding libertarianism as a kind of “thin” political commitment. We libertarians are united by a (rough) agreement on the proper role of the state in society, but we can agree on that point while vigorously disagreeing with each other about a host of other moral, religious, and cultural issues. Tolerance of such disagreement arguably makes for a more effective political coalition. And, after all, part of the appeal of libertarian political institutions is that they allow for people to believe in and live according to a diverse set of norms.
> 
> But does that mean that racism, nationalism, and a desire for cultural stasis sit just as well with the libertarian worldview as tolerance, cosmopolitanism, and cultural dynamism? I don’t think it does. However we define libertarianism, and whatever our reasons for endorsing it, we are libertarians for _some_ reason. And the reasons we have to endorse libertarianism will often be reasons for endorsing other values, projects, or cultural practices as well. Imagine someone who endorsed the non-aggression principle because they believed it reflected the fundamental equality of persons, for example, but who simultaneously believed that white Americans were the moral superior of every other person on the planet, and who expressed that belief through a variety of derogatory and marginalizing practices. Even if such a person in no way violated the non-aggression principle, I would still say that they are not a libertarian in as full a sense as they could, and should, be. The reason is not just that they have beliefs and practices that I find objectionable. It is that they have beliefs and practices that are incompatible with the very moral foundation on which libertarianism rests.

I&#8217;m a &#8220;thick&#8221; libertarian. If you&#8217;re going to treat people as individuals, as ends in themselves and not means to an end, it&#8217;s going to be mighty hard to keep that concept in your noggin while simultaneously embracing ideas like sexism, racism, homophobia, and Islamophobia. That would be some impressive cognitive dissonance.

To an extent, conservatism is slowly shrugging off the more odious components of an older, more hidebound era (though not completely; one of the items that has made a bruhaha [is this infographic telling CPAC goers what to wear](http://pinterest.com/pin/526287906424821234/), and basically says &#8220;Don&#8217;t enjoy yourself.&#8221;). However, having watched it happen over the past couple of years on Twitter and in the real world of Washington, DC (heh, real world, DC, now there&#8217;s a joke), I don&#8217;t think it&#8217;s so much that conservatism is evolving or changing, but that people are becoming more libertarian. We&#8217;re still not seeing a majority of them really libertarian yet, most of them are more like &#8220;conservatarians&#8221; (or libertarian conservatives, with the libertarian part being a mere adjective&#8230;) but it&#8217;s actually a move away from &#8220;very conservative.&#8221;

Of course, as David Boaz of Cato [wrote two years ago when social conservatives](http://voices.washingtonpost.com/right-turn/2011/01/a_response_to_the_cpac_boycott.html) boycotted CPAC over GOProud&#8217;s inclusion, conservatism is always changing. &#8220;Twenty years from now,&#8221; he said, &#8220;conservatives will deny they were ever anti-gay, just as they now have no memory of ever supporting discrimination against African-Americans or women.&#8221; But I think in this case, conservatism is actually starting to die. What will it have left to move on when gay rights become accepted across America? Attacking atheists? That&#8217;ll last for all of about an hour. Muslims? That&#8217;s already starting to weaken. Cyborgs? Let&#8217;s not derezz that lightbridge until we come to it.

What use does libertarianism have in tying itself to the mast of conservatism? What have we gotten out of not having a stronger and more independent brand? We&#8217;ve become associated with George W. Bush and his plutocratic economic policies (including TARP), which have made it far more difficult than it should be to argue for a free market in the 21st century. We&#8217;ve become associated with fools like Rush Limbaugh, who infamously called Sandra Fluke a slut last year when she testified on (demanded, really) government-bought contraceptives being a human right. And, to some extent, we&#8217;ve also become associated with the anti-gay strain of conservatism. This is not good. This is not libertarianism. And for crying out loud, we should not be tolerating this, nor associating with it.

I understand Blake and Sullivan&#8217;s mistake. A lot of people give journalists crap for not getting things quite right, but on this I&#8217;ll let them slide. They get a free pass because for the past twenty years&#8211;ever since the fall of the Berlin Wall and the dissolution of the Soviet Union&#8211;libertarians have given conservatives a free pass. This has got to stop. We come from a fundamentally different tradition, one that rejects the staid, hidebound stasism of the right, and the meaningless, virtue-sapping totalitarianism of the left. Let&#8217;s show that to the world. Let&#8217;s make that difference _today_.

PS: For other great blog posts from BHL on the subject of &#8220;thin&#8221; and &#8220;thick&#8221; libertarianism, check out these:

  1. &#8220;[Libertarianism and Morality](http://bleedingheartlibertarians.com/2011/12/libertarianism-and-morality/),&#8221; by Fernando Teson
  2. &#8220;[Libertarian Social Morality: Progressive, Conservative or Liberal?](http://bleedingheartlibertarians.com/2013/02/libertarian-social-morality-progressive-conservative-or-liberal/)&#8221; by Kevin Vallier

<!-- NgfbSharing::get_buttons content filter skipped: content ignored in back-end -->